Platform-based business models and financial
inclusion!

Karen Croxson (Financial Conduct Authority), Jon Frost (BIS), Leonardo Gambacorta
(BIS) and Tommaso Valletti (Imperial College London)

Preliminary version, 5 October 2021
Abstract

New players have entered finance, including fintech and big tech firms with digital
platforms in e-commerce, search or social media. Increasingly, incumbent financial
Institutions are also adopting platform -based business models. Digital platforms can
dramatically lower costs and thereby aid financial inclusion, but these same features
can give rise to digital monopolies. Platforms operate in multi-sided markets, and rely
crucially on big data. This leads to specific network effects, returns to scale and scope,
and trade-offs between efficiency and competition, financial stability and market
Integrity, and data privacy and consumer protection. To reap the benefits of platforms
for financial inclusion while mitigating risks, policy makers can choose to: (1) apply
existing financial, antitrust and privacy regulations, (11) adapt old and adopt new
regulations, combining an activity and entity-based approach, and/or (ll) provide new
public infrastructures such as digital identity and retail fast payment systems. We
argue that ex ante competition rules, data portability and public infrastructures are
particularly promising. Central banks and financial regulators need to coordinate with
competition and data protection authorities, and to consider complementarities with
antitrust and tax policies.

Keywords: financial inclusion, fintech, big tech, platforms.

JEL classification: E51, G23, 031.

With thanks to Stijn Claessens, Gregory Crawford, Patrizia Baudino, Johannes Ehrentraud, Bryan
Hardy, Sebastian Doerr, Jermy Prenio, Marc Hollanders, Nikita Aggarwal, Vikram Haksar, Yan Carriere-
Swallow, Ashraf Khan, Tonia Gilbert and numerous colleagues at the Bank for International
Settlements (BIS) and Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) for comments. We thank Giulio Cornell,
Alexandra End, Cornelius Nicolay and Huiming Yang for research assistance. The views expressed
here are those of the authors and not necessarily of the BIS, FCA or the European Commission (EC).
Tommaso Valletti was Chief Economist of the EC at the time of some competition cases discussed
below. No confidential information about these proceedings has been disclosed.

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion 1
1. Introduction

Over the past decade, a variety of new players have entered financial services —
including fintech firms (specialised in technology-enabled financial innovation) and
big tech firms (large technology companies whose primary activity is platform-based
digital services).º The presence of fintech and big tech firms in financial services is
growing especially rapidly in emerging market and developing economies (EMDEs).
Ih response, a number of incumbent bank and non-bank financial institutions are also
moving to a platform model by making greater use of big data and automation to
offer third-party services, such as digital payments, credit insurance and wealth
management, to their existing customers.? This entails a change to the traditional
business model, of financial institutions, where firms seek to match different groups
of clients In the market.

The move to platform-based business models is changing market structure in
financial services. While platforms can harness powerful economic forces to achieve
efficiency gains and greater financial inclusion for the unbanked, there are open
questions about the level playing field, and new and complex trade-offs between
efficiency and competition, financial stability and data privacy (BIS, 2019; Carriêre-
Swallow and Haksar, 2019; Feyen et al, 2021). Where platforms collect large amounts
of data for a variety of different business lines, this may lead to network effects and
economies of scale and scope. At the same, big tech firms have the potential to
become dominant through the advantages afforded by the so-called data-network-
activities (DNA) feedback loop, raising competition concerns.º The heavy use of
personal data raises important data privacy issues. Because platform-based business
models differ from traditional modes of offering financial services and the rules that
govern these, there is the potential for regulatory arbitrage.

Some of these issues may be more pressing ih the post-pandemic world.
Platforms can help to offer financial services remotely and thus to meet the increasing
demands for payments, credit, savings and insurance online and without the risk of
physical contact.º This has helped to promote financial inclusion in a world in which
more activities moved online. Some firms have even used their platforms and
personal data to help combat the pandemic (Cantú et al, 2020). At the same time,
issues around privacy and competition have been accentuated. Big tech firms have
seen rapid growth in their core business lines, such as e-commerce (Alfonso et al,
2021) and platforms will likely have greater market power and influence going
forward. Meanwhile, the economic consequences of the pandemic have put pressure
on households and firms that borrow from both fintech and big tech lenders and

? See FSB (2017), Philippon (2020) and Frost (2020) for overviews.

3 See EY (2020). Some institutions, such as BBVA, Santander, HSBC and Citi explicitly refer to their
strategy for creating a banking platform to offer third-party services. Meanwhile, payment card
networks — which have long operated in multi-sided markets — have acquired other firms in a bid to
become “networks of networks”.

? For instance, in the UK, Google and Facebook have already been found dominant in the online
advertising market. See UK Competition and Markets Authority (2020): “Both are now protected by
such strong incumbency advantages -— including network effects, economies of scale and unmatchable
access to user data — that potential rivals can no tonger compete on equal terms.”

5 During the pandemic, not only face-to-face activities but even physical means of payment have led
to concerns about potential transmission of the Covid-19 virus. For a discussion of concerns about
viral transmission through cash and the implications for digital payments, see Auer et al (20202).

2 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
from incum bent financial institutions. This has tested new credit models, highlighting
potential financial stability issues.

Public authorities across the globe have responded to the entry of fintech and
big tech firms, and the growth of platform-based business models with a variety of
regulatory and supervisory approaches to harness benefits while mitigating risks.
Many countries have set up innovation facilitators, such as sandboxes, hubs and
accelerators (see UNSGSA FinTech Working Group and CCAF, 2019; Cornelli et al,
2020b). Others have adopted new licensing regimes and updates to existing
regulation to account for new entities and activities (Ehrentraud et al, 2020). Ih general
though, fintech has not yet inspired major modifications to the overall structure of
prudential regulation. To date, core rulebooks on prudential safeguards, consumer
protection and market integrity have been broadly unaffected. Yet there are growing
concerns about policy trade-offs and the level playing field, and some major
Jurisdictions are moving to more ex ante, entity-based policy measures (Restoy, 2021;
Crisanto et al, 2021a; b). Platform -based business models could require further policy
reforms in the future.º In particular, if platforms are to enhance access to financial
services without dominating markets, then proactive policies may be necessary.

This paper discusses the implications of platform-based business models in
financial services for financial inclusion, market structure and regulation. We argue
that the economic features that make platforms so powerful in lowering costs and
supporting financial inclusion are the same features that give rise to digital
monopolies. They may raise significant risks to fair competition, and aggravate
consumer protection, financial integrity, and financial stability risks, and therefore can
create conflicts between various central bank and regulatory objectives. Given the
novelty of the challenges and rapid changes in markets, it is critical that authorities
learn from one another and from the experience of other industries. With a well-
informed, ex ante competition policy approach, data portability and appropriate use
of public infrastructures, platforms can be harnessed to enhance financial inclusion
while maintaining competitive markets and other policy goals.

This paper is organised as follows. Section 2 gives a primer on platform
economics to help explain how platforms reduce costs and thus enhance inclusion,
but also some of the potential risks and market failures. Section 3 looks at evidence
on the impact of platforms on financial inclusion from EMDEs and an advanced
economy — the United Kingdom. Section 4 sketches a range of possible policy
approaches to reap benefits and mitigate risks of platform -based business models in
finance, arguing for ex ante competition rules, data portability, public infrastructures
and policy experimentation. Finally, section 5 concludes.

As discussed below, many governments and competition authorities have been reflecting on new
tools and/or potential changes to the regulatory regime to ensure that digital platforms can be
regulated effectively, with a particular concern being the ability of platforms to leverage into
“adjacent” markets. À common proposal in many jurisdictions has been the creation of a specialist
digital unit to develop concentrated expertise in digital markets. See for example the advice of the
Digital Markets Taskforce to the UK Governmentin December 2020 recommending the establishment
of a Digital Markets Unit. This has recently been established.

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion 3
2. Platform economics: a primer

Platform-based business models are prevalent in a number of sectors of the modern
digital economy, including telecommunications, online (e-)commerce, and
increasingly in financial services. A (multi-sided) platform can be defined as a set of
Institutional arrangements that brings together two or more different types of
economic agents and facilitates trade between them (Evans and Schmalensee, 2014).
The interactions on platforms overcome frictions and generate economic value. Using
digital technologies, platforms may lower search frictions and make verification and
tracking less costly (Goldfarb and Tucker, 2020).

What is central to platforms is the potential for externalities among the various
sides; one side (providers) may attach value to wider acceptance by the other side
(users) and bigger networks may entail a higher probability of finding a trading
partner. Examples of different sides on platforms include drivers and passengers on
a ride-hailing app, and apartment owners and tourists on a hospitality platform. In
financial services, they include — increasingly — borrowers and savers on a fintech app,
or retail clients and financial service providers on social media, search or e-commerce
platforms.

Because externalities such as network effects make the providers' and users' (ie
all participants”) decisions interdependent, coordination issues arise. Platforms
perform an intermediary function that makes it possible to bring participants together
and facilitate their interactions. Since network effects, when positive, imply that the
value of such interactions depends on the number of participants, platforms take
measures to attract a large number of users and encourage participation. The largest
digital platforms use massive volumes of (personal) data, which allow for much more
efficient matching but also for network effects and “tipping" of markets in favour of
dominant platforms (Jullien and Sand-Zantman, 2020). With size also comes market
power, and the potential to leverage it.

Features of platform-based markets

Platform dynamics are typically characterised by different phases. Ih an early phase
of market development, there is intense competition where platforms try to
differentiate themselves, and at the same time attract as many participants as
possible, at least from one side of the market (eg users). Often in this initial phase
there is very little monetisation, if any at all, and platforms may even be loss-making.
Positive network effects generate “attraction loops”, by which higher activity makes it
more attractive for each group member to increase her activity level — like the DNA
loop noted above. This leads later to winner-takes-all (or winner-takes-most)
situations (Belleflamme and Peitz, 2021). Over time, markets with platforms have the
flavour of natural monopolies. Once a monopoly position is established, platforms
may monetise this by charging higher prices, and the market may become stuck in a
sub-optimal equilibrium.

Payment card networks are one long-standing example of a platform in financial services. Recently,
the entry of fintech and big tech firms, and new strategies by incumbent financial institutions, have
led to a proliferation of digital platforms in other areas of finance including, asset management, credit
and insurance.

4 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
In typical natural monopolies, increasing returns are due to supply-side
economies of scale. In contrast, in platform markets, increasing returns can also arise
from the demand side: when a platform grows by attracting more users, it is not (just)
that the average cost per user goes down, but also that the average revenue per user
goes up — because some users are willing to pay more to be on a bigger platform. Of
course, increasing returns on the demand side and the supply side may also
complement each other. Additionally, there may also be returns to scope, ie benefits
to platforms that have multiple business lines, in particular because of their control
Over massive amounts of (personal) data on users. The characteristics leading towards
natural monopolies can reinforce each other. For instance, the use of artificial
intelligence (AI) involves high fixed costs, and it makes more sense to invest in a
strong Al team if there are a variety of applications for them to work on.

Competition between platforms has several key features, which are already
apparent in the early work of Arthur (1989). A first feature is path dependence, ie the
final outcome depends on the way early adoption builds up. A second feature is lock-
ih effects: on the demand side, users are reluctant to switch between platforms,
implying that a latecomer platform finds it difficult to overcome the gap with the
iIncumbent, and that this gap grows over time. A third feature is a potential
inefficiency, as the platform that “wins” the market may not be the one that is
inherently superior. A lack of competition coming from the first two features may lead
to an inferior service or provider becoming entrenched.

Counterbalancing forces to market concentration

Although positive externalities such as network effects can drive markets towards
monopoly structures, there exist other forces that can counterbalance this tendency.
Some of these forces arise from competitive strategies enacted by rivais, while others
rely on some degree of regulatory intervention.

Starting with the former (market forces), the winner-takes-all or winner-takes-
most tendency can be moderated if competitors pursue differentiation strategies. À
smaller platform can compensate the lower network benefits that it generates by
offering better quality services and services that cater to particular consumers' tastes
and are sufficiently differentiated from those of its competitors. For instance, a social
media platform may differentiate itself from competitors by targeting a certain type
of social interaction (eg professional networking or photo sharing). A platform
offering banking services may distinguish itself by specialising in high privacy
protection (eg private banking for high net-worth individuals), or in developing
services uniquely catered to the needs of an underserved societal group (eg migrants
sending cross-border remittances). This may allow for multiple players in the market,
though there may not be much competition for individual users.

Multi-homing, that is, the possibility of users to utilise more than one platform
at the time, also plays a central role in mitigating the tendency for network effects to
lead to winner-takes-all situations.º Multi-homing, intuitively, allows agents to benefit
from all available externalities and potentially the services of all available platforms.
Multi-homing sounds very appealing and promising, but it is often not easy to
achieve in practice. One reason has to do with consumer behaviour: users might be
able to compare several options when joining a certain platform service, but then opt

$ For the example of the credit card industry, see Rochet and Tirole (2008). The term “multi-homing” is

borrowed from the internet literature and refers to users' participation in multiple platforms.

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion 5
for only one solution; think for instance of a phone and internet bundle. Most people
do not own several subscriptions and may show inertia ih switching. In many platform
environments, users seem to be affected by several behavioural biases, such as not
looking for alternatives to their default suggestions. This creates considerable
frictions to a multi-homing environment. Another reason might be related instead to
less innocent strategies put In place by incum bent platforms to make multi-homing
particularly costly to users.º

As a side remark — but an important one — single or multi-homing refers to a
particular group of users, not necessarily to the whole platform in a multi-sided
market. For instance, there are instances where for various reasons one side of the
market single-homes while the other side will want to or need to multi-home. For
instance, we may use a single credit card, own a single phone or browse one preferred
online newspaper, while merchants need to accept most credit cards, individuals
receive calls from multiple providers and advertisers want to show their ads in
multiple news outlets. This can generate a situation of so-called “competitive
bottlenecks”", in the sense that the side that needs to multi-home has no other way
than using the platform on which the particular single-homing buyer is active.
Platforms therefore do not compete for this side (the “bottleneck” feature) but may
compete for the other side. For instance, credit card providers may offer rewards to
entice retail users, while levwying high interchange fees on merchants. This situation
has generated many regulatory interventions, most notably mobile termination rates
ih telephony, and interchange fee caps for credit cards.

These observations lead to the second type of force that can mitigate
concentration and monopolies, namely regulation, The most important regulatory
policy is arguably to enforce interoperability. Platforms are interoperable if the users
of one platform are able to interact with the users of another platform.
Interoperability plays a similar role to multi-homing, in that the implications of
choosing a particular platform do not prevent users from interacting with users on
the other platform. Ih an important sense, interoperability allows us to keep most of
the efficiencies of platform economics (positive externalities), but ensures that these
externalities are available to all at the industry level, and do not accrue uniquely to a
single firm, leading to dominance. The most salient case possibly comes from
telecoms: we can call anyone, independently from the device, operating system and
telecom operator. Additionally, thanks to regulatory interventions in many
Jurisdictions, when we change device, operating system or telecom operator, we do
not lose our phone number or contact numbers and can port them across platforms.
This is why, despite network externalities playing a big role in telecoms, we still are
able to witness some degree of competition among telecoms operators.

In financial services, for example, interoperable payment systems can facilitate
competition and lead to greater efficiency in payments, both domestically and across
borders. Regulatory interventions can help to open “"closed-loop”" payment systems
like those of AliPay, WeChat Pay and M-Pesa and to allow for a level playing field (BIS,
2020). “Open Banking”, which allows users to securely share banking data with third

For instance, Google is used as a search engine by well over 90% of Europeans. This may well relate
to Google search being a high-quality search engine. However, Google (which also owns the Android
operating system) made it extremely difficult for a competing search engine such as Microsoft's Bing
to be installed on Android devices by way of bundling practices and contractual arrangements with
phone manufacturers. These practices were sanctioned by the European Commission with a fine of
over €£4bn euros. Notice that Google also pays an undisclosed amount to Apple in order to be
installed also as search engine on iOS devices.

6 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
parties through application programming interfaces (API) pursuant to the Second EU
Payment Services Directive can allow competitors to offer services based on the same
user data (Open Banking in the UK is discussed in more detail in Section 3).

Yet given the sensitivity of retail transaction data, it is important that
interoperability goes hand-in-hand with adequate protections to ensure privacy. Ih
some countries in which central banks have contributed to public infrastructures, as
in India, this has gone along with rules regarding how data are collected and whether
providers have control over them (D'Silva et al, 2019; Carriêre-Swallow et al, 2021). Ih
these cases, it is often possible for users in different networks (eg Google Pay and
Facebook's WhatsApp Pay) to transact with one another, just as clients using different
banks can send and receive transfers across the same payment infrastructure.
Customers may also have control over their payment data. A further considerations
defining liability, le which party is responsible 1h the case of a data breach. Finally,
interoperability may have to be supported by competition (antitrust) policy and other
policy tools in the hands of various public authorities. Indeed, interoperability is one
of the key proposals in the Digital Markets Act (DMA), a legislative proposal of the
European Commission to deal with dominant digital companies (defined as
"gatekeepers”), discussed in section 4.

Implications of platforms in financial services

Overall, in financial services, platforms may enhance efficiency in key respects. Ih
particular, they can use big data and new digital technologies to lower the cost of
financial services for users and serve previously unmet customer demands. This could
allow services to achieve a large scale very rapidly, and thus to achieve powerful
benefits for financial inclusion. For example, Philippon (2020) constructs a model of
fintech platforms offering robo-advice. A new technology lowers the fixed cost per
customer of providing services (possibly to zero, as robo-advisors operate online and
do not need staff to interact with a customer), but maintain a high fixed cost overall
(the cost of developing good algorithms). This should lead to a net positive for
consumers — what we could term “value-creating innovation", which adds to overall
consumer surplus. It may even benefit poorer consumers disproportionately, as they
will be served at lower marginal cost and cross-subsidised by wealthier consumers.
However, the model also recognises the potential for big data to lead to biases, new
forms of discrimination and exclusion (see also Morse and Pence, 2020). One
implication of the platform-based business model is that firms earn relatively more
fee income rather than, say, net interest margins. Fee income often fits closely with
the “matchmaking” business model, and lt does not require a balance sheet, with the
need for market funding, financial regulation and supervision. For these firms, a key
part of their franchise value is the value of their network and data.

Given these features, new platforms could also introduce new risks associated
with market power and data privacy. Ih particular, the high fixed costs of developing
a successful platform may lead to more concentrated market structures. Overall, there
is the potential for: (1) monopolistic behaviour and price discrimination, including
through the use of big data; (1) anti-competitive behaviour, such as creating barriers
to entry and "enveloping' competitors; (ill) algorithmic biases and exclusion; and (iv)
violations of data privacy. While a platform could thus use its network and big data
to enhance convenience and lower costs for users, it can also use this to capture
economic rents and impose externalities on others.

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion 7
As an illustration, Graph 1 compares the consumer surplus, monopoly surplus
and welfare under different market structures.º The classic model of perfect
competition is given in panel A: the market clears at point A, where the (downward-
sloping) demand curve meets the (horizontal) supply curve, at marginal cost (PJ.
Consumers who value the product (1h this case a financial service) at more than the
market price obtain a consumer surplus (denoted in blue). The classical pure
monopoly is given in panel B: a monopolist sets the price at a higher level, Pm, above
marginal cost, thus leading to a lower quantity being consumed (Qrm) and a monopoly
surplus (denoted in red). For digital platforms, big data may help to predict the
willingness of individual users to pay for services very accurately, allowing platforms
to engage |n price discrimination, le charge the highest price that each user would be
willing to pay. With sophisticated algorithms, a monopolistic platform could identify
each consumer's reservation price, and set a personalised price just below it to
capture rents. This may be called “value-extracting innovation". Compared to perfect
competition or pure monopoly without the use of big data, a digital monopoly (panel
O) offers higher rents to the platform. Crucially, if the platform has lower costs per
user, It may be able to serve the clients with a low reservation cost, at price Pp thus
bringing new (previously unserved) users into the financial system. In this market
structure, some (eg wealthier) users will pay higher prices for the same service than
other (eg lower-income) users, thus increasing the overall quantity of services
provided and enhancing financial inclusion. At the same time, the platform will
capture a large monopoly surplus.

Furthermore, there may be the potential for digital platforms to offer financial
services to a greater extent than would be economically efficient (“value-destroying
innovation”). Ih cases where preferences can be manipulated, ie platforms can entice
users to overestimate the benefits from services or to pay even more than their
reservation price (eg by sharing valuable personal data), such users could be even
worse off. Ih this case, overall welfare could be lower (panel D). Such manipulation
might arise by capitalising on known behavioural biases. Such advantages could also
be obtained by an incum bent, for instance, by not allowing a competitor to emerge.

Illustrative market structures: from competition to market manipulation

Graph 1

A. Perfect competition B. Pure monopoly C. Digital monopoly D. Preference manipulation

PÁ PÁ

io À PD,
>
% A AQ Aa VQ
EM Consumer surplus Em Monopoly surplus
Welfare (dead weight) loss - incl, perceived surplus

Source: Boissay et al (2021); authors' elaboration.

* Thisexample draws on Boissay et al (2021), with a few modifications relevant to our later discussion.

8 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
The point here is that the information in the hands of a specific platform provider
might have dramatic implications for consumers, according to the underlying market
structure. To the extent that over time we are getting closer and closer to algorithms
that can "learn' about individual preferences, one can imagine — prospectively at least
— approaching the text-book case of first-degree price discrimination, that is, each
consumer is a relevant market. To the extent that competition exists for this
consumer, this can imply extremely intense rivalry, so that the consumer benefits the
most. Conversely, the worst situation for a consumer is one where only one platform
know this detailed information, and lts rivals do not. This leads, in principle, to a case
where the entire consumer surplus is extracted by a dominant platform.

While this latter situation may sound just like a hypothetical and academic
scenario, it may nevertheless be important to pause and think, in practice, how big
data could change the very nature of competition in the financial sector, particularly
ih services like credit and insurance. The premise of competition In credit and
Insurance is typically one of imperfect and incomplete information, where the
customer knows something about her characteristics and potential risky behaviour
that financial institutions do not know, and they try to elicit this information over time
and via contractual incentives. Imagine now that a platform firm, like Google, enters
the insurance market. Google would know information about each customer, such as
browsing behaviour, apps downloaded and used, videos watched, e-mails written (or
drafted but unsent!), and much more. For instance, Google might know that an
individual goes on gambling websites. This information may put Google in a special
position vis-à-vis potential competing insurers that are unable to access similar
information. (In this example, Google may determine that accessing gambling sites
correlates with riskier behaviour in other domains and choose not to sell insurance to
the individual, leaving it to the pool of customers available to competitors, which
therefore deteriorates). Data protection laws may prevent or curtail Google's ability
to exploit wider information it holds about individuals,"* but clearly potential
competition considerations may arise. Competition may no longer take place
between similarly imperfectly informed providers and an originally level playing field
could be tilted in favour of one firm only. The use of wider personal data may be
efficient, but we still recall that in panel C, consumers enjoy a lower consumer surplus
than in the other panels.

More generally, big tech platforms such as Google, Facebook, Amazon, Alibaba
and Tencent have the incentive and ability to expand into other businesses, especially
other platform markets, in order to acquire the data generated in those markets. The
same may hold for larger fintech firms and incumbents that have a range of business
lines and platform models. They have accumulated large datasets about individual
consumers that they can combine with payments data in order to deliver products
that traditional banks cannot replicate, as in the insurance example above. Banks then
risk being 'enveloped' (de La Mano and Padilla, 2018), where the platform operator
typically bundles services that cannot be replicated by traditional players, ultimately

For instance, in the European Union, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) limits the use of
personally identifiable information, particularly 'sensitive' information such as health data, and gives
users rights inter alia to securely share information with other firms if they so choose (so-called “right
to data portability”, Art 20 GDPR). There is considerable debate, however, as to whether the GDPR is
currently being enforced in an effective way Europe.

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion 9
leading to market tipping in the banking sector, too.!? In principle, financial services
could also help platform operators to tip other markets. For example, If a consumer
is buying a car or a refrigerator, and a platform operator offering financial services
like loans or insurance knows consumer preferences and creditworthinessin real time,
this may help it to tip these markets, as well. A platform operator may also steer users
toward its own (or its preferred partners”) financial services, for instance by putting
these offers at the top of a list of offers.'?

Finally, given the centrality of personal data in platform-based services and
business models, there is the potential that, even in competitive markets, those users
who are not willing to provide such data may be excluded from potential benefits
such as quicker and cheaper credit or insurance products. New research shows, for
instance, that women are generally less willing to share personal data than men in
exchange for better offers on financial services (Chen et al, 2021). Similar findings
hold for older users (Carlin et al, 2019). If data on these users are unavailable, there is
the risk that providers of financial services — whether new fintech or big tech
platforms, or incum bents using digital technologies — will consider these users to be
higher-risk. Ih this way, the move to digital platforms could exacerbate financial
exclusion, social inequality and the “digital divide”, by further excluding already less-
advantaged social groups.

3. The experience to date with platform-based finance and
financial inclusion

Empirical evidence to date suggests that new platforms in finance have helped to
advance financial inclusion overall, in some cases dramatically. In particular, mobile
money and other platform-based services have already led to impressive gains in
access to payment services, credit, insurance and wealth management, especially in
EMDEs. There have also been positive signs on inclusion in advanced economies,
including the UK.

Evidence on platforms and inclusion from EMDEs

At the global level, the proportion of adults with an account with a financial institution
or mobile money service rose from 51% in 2011 to 69% in 2017 (World Bank, 2018).
Mobile money platforms played a particularly crucial role in increasing access in sub-
Saharan Africa, using telecom munications networks to offer low-cost payments and
other financial services by phone to large numbers of users. As of 2019, a full 79% of

12? — Envelopment refers to entry by one platform provider into another provider's market by bundling its
functionality with that of the target, so as to leverage shared user relationships. See Eisenmann et al
(2011).

13 —Asan additional example, in credit, one of the biggest drivers of insolvency are divorce proceedings.
This is generally not known and hence cannot be used by traditional banks. Yet big tech providers
may be able to infer from browsing behaviour, e-mails, transaction or geolocation data if an individual
is having an affair, if a couple is in marriage counselling or if they are likely to be divorced in the near
future. This knowledge, gleaned from big data and machine learning, and perhaps not even clear to
the (human) staff of a platform provider, can give an incomparable advantage to platform lenders.
These providers may automatically decline from showing a credit product to that individual, meaning
that this potential borrower (“lemon”) is left for traditional competitors. The level playing field may
then be compromised and competition would suffer.

10 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
adults in Kenya had a mobile money account (CBK-KNBS-FSD, 2019). Mobile money
platforms have proliferated across Africa, and a growing ecosystem of fintech
platforms and incumbent financial institutions use mobile money networks to reach
their customers (CCAF, 2020).

In China, digital platforms have enabled dramatic bounds in financial inclusion,
with support from public policy and regulation (Hua and Huang, 2020; Luohan
Academy, 2019). Ant Group (1.3 billion users) and Tencent (900 million users) offer
low-cost payments, credit, insurance and savings products to hundreds of millions of
users, leveraging their parent groups' activities in esccommerce and social media,
respectively. Recently, further platforms like Pinduoduo (680 million users), Meituan
(480 million users) and JD.com (440 million users) have rolled out competing payment
products. Ih lending, empirical evidence suggests that big tech lending has helped to
overcome local credit supply frictions and increase credit access for small firms (Hau
et al, 2020). Big tech credit has also reduced the need for costly collateral, and hence
the relationship between lending and asset prices (Gambacorta et al, 2020). Ih
Investment, Ant Group offers what was, until January 2020, the largest money market
fund (MMFP) ih the world, Yuwebao (“Leftover treasure”), while Tencent offers users
access to MMFs through its Licaitong platform. The Chinese big tech platforms have
become major providers of insurance products, for instance through their “mutual
aid” offerings, which allow small users to pool costs from unexpected health
emergencies — an activity outside of existing frameworks for health insurancein China.
In late 2020, proposed guidelines by the China State Administration for Market
Regulation (SAMR) and China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (CBIRO)
set out measures to limit monopoly risks and increase retention requirements for
lending (see section 4).

Ih India, platforms have become major players in payments, building on public
infrastructures like the digital ID system Aadhaar (1.3 billion users as of September
2021) and retail fast payment system Unified Payment Interface (UPI) (D'Silva et al,
2019). Notably, UPl is a platform operated by a consortium of incum bent banks and
the central bank, yet it has allowed for greater competition and interoperability
between bank and non-bank payment providers. Google processed 820 million
transactions in October 2020 through its Google Pay offering; Walmart's PhonePe,
introduced by the e-commerce platform Flipkart, became the largest payment
provider on UPI with 835 million transactions (Singh, 2020). Amazon Pay, Ant Group-
backed Paytm and Facebook's WhatsApp Pay are also significant players in payments.
A range of P2P platforms operate in credit markets, and both Amazon and Google
have partnerships with financial institutions to offer credit through their platforms.
Overall, the combination of public infrastructures and privately operated platforms
by fintech firms, big tech firms and incumbent financial institutions has helped India
to increase access to transaction accounts from 10% in 2008 to over 80% of Indian
adults today. Survey evidence shows that 87% of digitally active Indian adults used
fintech services as of 2019 (EY, 2019).

Progress has been similarly impressive in other Asian countries, where big tech,
fintech and incumbent-run platforms are proliferating rapidly. In Indonesia, for
instance, ride hailing apps like Grab and Go-Jek have also become large providers of
payments and other financial services, focused particularly on retail users. In Thailand,
one incumbent financial institution — Kasikornbank — has increasingly parthered with
both fintech and big tech providers, and non-financial firms, to offer third-party
services to its clients. It has also taken efforts to serve the visually impaired and the
elderly through a mobile banking interface that uses voice and vibration cues

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion e
(Banchongduang, 2016). In the Philippines, platforms have dramatically reduced the
cost of onboarding new clients. This became particularly relevant when the Covid-19
pandemic broke out; thanks to digital platforms, over 4 million users were able to
remotely open an account in March and April 2020, alone (De Vera-Yap et al, 2020).

Ih Latin America, meanwhile, platforms have in some cases been effective at
reaching the informal sector. In Argentina, credit from e-commerce platform Mercado
Libre was able to serve borrowers who would otherwise lack access to bank credit
(Frost et al, 2019). In Peru, the publicly run Bilteteria Móvil (BIM) platform has allowed
for interoperability between e-money providers, which has facilitated government
transfers to informal workers and filled gaps in inclusion in rural areas (Del Carpio
Ponce, 2018; Sotomayor et al, 2018).

Platforms in finance have thus proven to be remarkably scalable. For instance,
fintech credit platforms, which connect borrowers and savers directly, have emerged
Ih nearly every major economy around the world. Lending volumes are generally
larger where existing banking sector mark-ups are higher and regulation is more
conducive (Claessens et al, 2018; Rau, 2020; Beaton and Bazarbash, 2020). Some have
argued that fintech credit and other forms of crowdfunding can play an important
role in financial inclusion if an enabling and safe environments in place Jenik et al,
2017). Meanwhile, big tech is scaling even more rapidly. In sub-Saharan Africa, Asia,
and Latin America, telecoms, e-commerce platforms and ride-hailing apps are
offering an increasingly wide range of financial (and non-financial) services, and
collecting ever more data through the data-network-activitles feedback loop. In
addition to their large foothold in payments, big tech firms are becoming increasingly
important in credit markets (Graph 2, left-hand panel). Many big tech lenders lend to
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), using the data from e-commerce and
other online activities to more accurately predict default (Frost et al, 2019). Among
EMDEs, lending by big tech platforms is particularly relevant in China, Kenya,
Indonesia and Russia (right-hand panel).

Global big tech credit is booming, overtaking fintech credit Graph 2
Big tech credit is overtaking fintech credit! Global lending is small, but larger in some economies
USDbn USD mn, logarithmic scale Per cent
750 —100,000 25
600 10,000 2.0
|) 450 1,000 15
HM 300 100 1.0
[ 150 10 | DS
—
|— — mm 1 | | emo o Do
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 CN US JP KR GB ID NL RU KE DE
Lending volume: INI Fintech'' IM Big tech Lending volume (Ihs):;? Ratio to total stock of credit (rhs):?
Em Fintech e Total alternative credité
mm Big tech

1 Fintech credit is lending facilitated by electronic (online) platforms that are not operated by commercial banks. Big tech credit is credit
extended or facilitated by large companies whose primary activity is digital services (big tech firms). ? Data for 2019. 3 Domestic credit
provided by the financial sector. Data for 2018. º Total alternative credit is defined as the sum of fintech and big tech credit.

Source: Cornelli et al (2020).

12 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
The dramatic adoption of fintech and big tech is also visible in data on app
downloads, aggregated by Sensor Tower from the Google Play and Apple App stores
(the two dominant platforms for smartphone apps). In advanced economies, fintech
payment apps have seen rising adoption, especially since 2014, while big tech
payment apps have ticked up since 2019, including during the Covid-19 pandemic
(Graph 3, left-hand panel). In EMDEs, big tech payment apps have seen several
discrete waves of adoption and dramatically greater take-up over time. Notably, there
is also greater concentration among finance apps in EMDEs, as measured by the
Herfindahl-Hirschmann Index (HH) for downloads (right-hand panel). In both AEs
and EMDEs, downloads of payment apps offered by incumbents has been much lower
during the same period.

Downloads of payment apps by fintech firms, big tech firms and incumbents' Graph 3

Advanced economies

Emerging market economies

Millions of downloads Index Millions of downloads Index
LL)
18 450 30 e : 750
[L)
L)
12 300 20 500
- tejo
6 150 10 | 250
o E Vo 2 pm
RENSNNSCNSNS SNS! | RESSENSNSSSSCNSNSNSSSSNSSSCNSSNS SESC
2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021
Payment app downloads (lhs): INE Big tech ENEM Fintech MM Incumbent financial institutions — Rhs: e HHI?

HHI = Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of market concentration.

17 Downloads of all payment apps among the top 50 finance apps as classified by Sensor Tower. “Fintech" refers to apps by new entrants
specialised in financial technology; “big tech" refers to apps by large technology companies whose primary activity is digital services, rather
than financial services, and “incumbent financial institutions" refers to apps from commercial banks, insurers, card networks and other financial
institutions. ? Yearly average; calculated on the top 50 finance apps as dassified by Sensor Tower.

Sources: Sensor Tower; authors' caleulations.

Evidence on platforms and inclusion from the UK and other advanced
economies

Itis not only in EMDEs that fintech, big tech and incumbent platforms are contributing
to financial inclusion. There are also key examples from advanced economies, where
access to transaction accounts, credit and other services is higher than EMDEs, but
certainly not universal. In particular, the UK provides an interesting case study for
development of platform-based offerings and fintech solutions, including some
Innovations that can improve financial inclusion. As an economy with a high degree
of innovation!* and a regulatory approach that explicitly targets greater competition

1º  Forinstance,the world's first fintech credit platform — Zopa — was launched in the UK in 2006. London
is home to large incumbent financial institutions in banking, insurance and asset management, and
recently, the UK is home to a large and diverse ecosystem of fintech providers, as well as hosting
several international big tech firms.

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion 13
and better consumer outcomes, the UK can provide insights that may be relevant for
other economies, whether advanced, emerging or developing.

Open Banking was introduced in the UK in 2018, as the local implementation of
the EU-wide Second Payment Services Directive (PSD2), with the aim of stimulating
increased competition and innovation in the financial services industry. Customers
can register with banks or authorised organisations (third-party providers) and
Instruct their existing bank to let them access their payment account details via a
secure system. Over 200 firms regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) are
now enrolled in Open Banking 1h the UK. Among them are a number of fintech firms
developing innovative solutions targeted at helping lower-income, financially
vulnerable individuals or traditionally underserved groups.

Some of these innovations are designed to help underserved groups to manage
their cash flow more effectively or improve how they save. For example, apps may
help individuals to save and invest small amounts with each spending transaction,"?
set aside a portion of their salary for saving of bill pay'º or advise clients on how much
and where to save." Other fintech firms are exploiting Open Banking to help
individuals build out their credit profiles and access financing more easily. These
platform-based models may help users to build a credit history," gain access to
mortgage loans'" or protect themselves from financial fraud and scams.ºº

Beyond Open Banking powered tools, the UK's fintech ecosystem has generated
other examples of platform -based innovation designed to broaden access to financial
services for underserved users. This includes ultra-short term car insurance,º* support
to homeless individuals for opening a basic bank account? and using cash to buy

1? —UkK-based Moneybox helps individuals save and invest by exploiting Open Banking to monitor a
person's spending, round up their purchases (eg on a coffee) to the nearest British pound, and then
move the “spare change” into savings or investments for the individual.

Wagestream is an Open Banking-powered tool to enable employees at registered firms to access a
portion of their salary as it is earned (eg on a weekly basis) and then budget more effectively by
allocating their earnings to certain bills or save directly from their pay. They can also access financial
education resources.

Plum offers a savings app that links to a person's bank account, analyses their income, expenses and
spending habits and helps to set aside an affordable amount for savings. It can also help people
review their spending, understand where they may be overpaying on bills and engage a utility
switching service.

Canopy lets users leverage Open Banking to track successful rental payments and have these
automatically counted on their credit reports. This can help those with lower income and/or limited
credit histories build up their credit scores and overcom e “thin file” problems in accessing credit.

Mojo is an online mortgage broker combining credit and open banking data to improve access to
mortgage lending by generating a MortgageScore for them, giving them advice to improve this and
support to compare deals across lenders and understand the best option for them.

*?º —Kalgerais using Open Banking to safeguard elderly and vulnerable people from financial fraud and

scamsin a way that allows them to retain their autonomy. The app alerts authorised relatives or carers
to unusual activity on the individual's accounts, but without sharing account details or enabling them
to move money.

*?? — Cuwa provides ultra-short term car insurance (eg for a few hours) to enable users to borrow or pool

friends cars. To achieve this, Cuvva queries various data sources to check driving licence data, the
Claims and Undenwriting Exchange, and automated fraud protection, and integrates with Facebook
so that customers can see which of their friends have cars to borrow. The FCA's Innovation Hub
supported the firm to understand how its new model could fit into the regulatory framework. It is

now authorised and operational.
*?? — ProxyAddress, a UK start-up, has just launched a pilot to enable homeless individuals to open a basic

bank account by providing them with a proxy "fixed address' for use in the on-boarding process. The

14 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
items from online merchants.? In each case, start-ups use a platform-based model
and big data to make available a service that may otherwise be too costly or subject
to uncertainty to be performed,

The impact of these innovations is visible in aggregate indicators of inclusion
such as the FCA Financial Lives Survey. Between April 2017 and February 2020, the
proportion of adults who used a mobile app to undertake day-to-day banking
activities rose by 17 percentage points, to 59%. The rise was relatively larger for
women, and was also apparent for users with characteristics of vulnerability in the
areas of health, life events, resilience and capability (Graph 4, left-hand panel). The
share of adults who are digitally excluded, meaning poor or non-existing digital skills
as assessed in the survey, fell in the same period (right-hand panel).

Innovative platform-based approaches can also be seen in other advanced
economies. Ih the United States a number of non-bank financial services providers,
such as Kabbage, LendUp and Petal, are using cash-flow data in order to provide
unsecured, short-term credit to consumers and small and medium-sized businesses
who othenwvise would struggle to access loans due to lack of traditional credit history.
FinRegLab studied six of these providers empirically, finding that the cash-flow
metrics used had predictive power for credit risk and the participants were being
served who historically would have faced constraints on their ability to access credit.º?
One study suggests that fintech credit platforms tend to have greater activities in
localities underserved by traditional banks (Jagtiani and Lemieux, 2018). Meanwhile,
big tech platforms are becoming increasingly active in payments and credit markets.
Amazon lends to small businesses through its merchant sellers programme (Amazon,
2018). Google has announced co-branded accounts with eight US banks through
Google Pay, aiming to attract new users while building on existing bank systems
(Moeser, 2020).

Meanwhile, some big tech platforms explicitly emphasise the benefits of their
products for financial inclusion.?º Some have proposed new initiatives in payments
such as stablecoins, often explicitly referring to the challenges of financial inclusion
and cross-border remittances.º* It is too early to assess the extent to which these
initiatives will deliver on financial inclusion goals, or whether inclusion is merely being
used as part of the marketing. Indeed, similar to the term “greenwashing” for firms
that overstate their environmental contributions, some industry specialists refer to
“inclusion washing" in financial services. In EMDEs, where access to financial services
is very low, welfare gains for financial inclusion could be quite large. In advanced

aim is to enable customers at risk of financial exclusion to maintain access to a safe repository of
funds, and an ability to receive wage payments which can support their transition out of
homelessness. The firm has been accepted into the FCA regulatory sandbox.

*? —One new UK-based start-up is developing technology to help people use cash to buy items from
online merchants. While cash use is declining, cash remains an important payment method for many,
including some vulnerable consumers and small businesses. This product may help to allow users
who prefer or depend on cash to participate in e-commerce and the digital economy more generally.

*? — FinRegLab, “The use of cash flow data in undenwriting credit: empirical research findings” July 2019,
https://finreglab.org/Avp-content/uploads/2019/07/FRL Research-Report Final.pdf

*” —SeeegonAntFinancial https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20200115005313/en/Ant-
Financial-Debuts-World's-Leading-Fintech-Conference, and on Goodle:
https://pay.gooagle.com/intl/en in/about/.

*  Seeeglibra:
https://libra.ora/en-US/wp-content/uploads/sites/23/2019/06/LibraWhitePaper en US.pdf.

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion 15
economies, where financial services are widely available and especially credit markets
are already very deep, such benefits may be smaller.ºº?

Use of mobile apps for banking in the UKis rising, as digital exclusion declines

In per cent Graph 4
Increase in share of adults who used a mobile app to Share of adults who are digitally excluded by age and
undertake day- to-day banking activities! gender (April 201 17 Feb 2020)?

í : É 75 ; :; 50

: : S : : :
: = 60 40
ml E: RS bm 45 : : 30
: * = :
: : = :
õ : E : 30 ; : 20
S ;
| : - 15 10
se)
: + 0 o é pm = E Em o
|| Í
e leu sa a ul; EEN NE = = e Es E
= & ls é E é & E *|l* z E Sig 3% E 3 Ef
| | Oatacióristios E |
Gender | Age ] | Gender Age
| | | Guias rabilia? | !
EH Percentage increase, 2017-2020 EEN 2017 — EEE 2020

1 Share of all UK adults who have undertaken day-to-day banking activities in the last 12 months (April 2017: 2472 respondents / February
2020: 4,089 respondents), excluding 'don't know' responses (1%/0%). ? Derived through an algorithm processing the survey results, to
identify whether respondents display at least one of the four drivers of vulnerability, namely health, life events, resilience and capability. For
more details, see https://www.fca.org.uk/publication/research/financial-lives-survey-2020.pdf. 3 All UK adults (April 2017: 12,865
respondents / February 2020: 16,190 respondents).

Source: UK FCA Financial Lives Survey (FLS), April 2017 / February 2020.

Evidence on platforms and concentration

In financial services, the tendency toward greater market concentration through
platforms is already visible. lh particular, some big tech players have already achieved
dominant market positions, particularly in payments in EMDEs. The two big tech
platforms AliPay and WeChat Pay have grown rapidly and jointly control 94% of the
Chinese mobile payments market (Graph 5, left-hand panel). Ih India, on UPI, there is
somewhat more competition, but two big tech providers control 85% of the market
by transaction value (right-hand panel), and a similarly high proportion by transaction
volume (number of transactions). In many countries in sub-Saharan Africa, mobile
money operators have become systemically important providers.

*” Fora discussion of the link between financial inclusion and macroeconomic goals in EMDEs and

advanced economies, see Sahay et al (2015).

16 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
BigTechs dominate digital payments in China and India Graph5

Share of the “Big Two" in mobile payments in China'* Market shares in India's UPI
Market share, % CNY trilions — Index Percent of transaction value
100 3,900 100
FER ETESEsssssTss==
" e
re 3,800 75
º
50 o 3,700 50
25 3,600 25
o — a ms 3,500 o
12 13 14 15 | o E 1 (o
q 03 2020 Q1 nm = 2021
Lhs: e Sum of the market share of ivo) and er
: . . Lhs: e HHI Rhs: NM Big tech — Incumbent
Rhs: Transaction value of mobile payments on ma Finteckh MM Other apps

Em Alipay EN Tenpay
— — Other third-party mobile payment providers in China

HHI = Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of market concentration.
? Market shares for 2012 are estimated based on market evidence. ? Tenpay includes WeChat Pay and QQ Wallet.

Sources: analysys.cn; Statista, Industries; National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI); A Carsten, S Claessens, F Restoy and H S Shin (2021),
"Regulating big techs in finance”, BIS Bulletins, no 45; authors' calculations.

Globally, the recent spike in merger and acquisition activity by large digital
payment firms (Graph 6, left-hand panel) suggests that there are trends toward
growing concentration in payment markets. In this figure, the size of the bubble
represents the market capitalisation of the acquiring com pany, while the height in the
graph represents the deal size. It is notable that some of the largest deals have been
horizontal acquisitions, ie the acquiring of direct competitors by card networks and
payment processors (blue dots). In other cases, vertical acquisitions have taken place
(red dots). These deals allow payment firms to now perform “in-house” activities for
which they previously required vendors — implying a greater bundling of payment
services. Such M&A deals (shown in blue in the right-hand panel) are generally small
compared to the overall market capitalisation of the platform companies (shown in
red). Yet deals were particularly large in 2019, when companies operating digital
payment platforms spent nearly 10% of their market value on acquiring other
companies. This related in part to “mega-deals" such as those by FIS and Worldpay,
Fiserv and First Data, and Global Payments and TSYS. In 2020 and 2021, such activity
has slowed again.

There is mounting evidence that M&A deals may influence the incentives for new
entry into financial services, particularly if large com panies acquire platform providers
before they can build a sufficiently large network (Kamepalli et al, 2020; Cornelli et al,
2021). Moreover, there is also the potential for big tech platform providers to halt
their own innovation efforts when acquiring a competitor with similar capabilities —
so-called "reverse killer acquisitions” (Caffarra et al, 2020).

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion 7
Payment platforms have embarked on a buying spree'

Graph 6

Merger and acquisition (M&A) activity by selected global Total M&A volume spiked in 2019, reaching over 10% of

payment platforms has proliferated since 2017 overall platform market cap
Purchase price in millions of US dollars, logarithmicscale = USD bn

10,000 1,600

oO
e sn º 1.000 1,200

Per cent

: 10.0
ro
co. ..
Dm: L) o
: | e o, oe 100 800 5.0
o e. e. AQ o
eo, º% 10 400 º kl 2.5
Imrelbere bem hesme eee eme lee e da o == 0.0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Deal characteristics: e Vertical integration e Horizontal integration YTD

Lhs: IIE M&A deal value — NNE Average total market capitalisation

Rhs: €& Ratio of deals to market capitalisation

1 For 2020, data up to 31 January 2021. Each dotin the left-hand panel represents an M&A deal by Ant Financial, Fidelity National Information
Services (FIS), FISERV, Global Payments, Mastercard, PayPal, Square or Visa as collected by PitchBook and Refinitiv Eikon. This excludes
divestitures and intra-company operations. M&A deals are classified as “vertical” when the acquiring and the target firm operate at different
stages along the same payment chain, as determined by company reports. In “horizontal” deals, the acquiring and target firm are direct
competitors in at least one key business line. The size of each dot is proportional to the acquiring company market capitalisation on the day
of the deal or, in the case of Ant Financial, the valuation of Ant Financial as of end-2018, multiplied by changes in the market capitalisation of

Alibaba Holdings relative to end-2018. The same sample is used in the right-hand panel.

Sources: BIS (2020): “Central banks and payments in the digital era”, Annual Economic Report, ch 3, pp 67-96, June; authors' calculations.

Platform models by incumbent financial institutions

As discussed above, a number of Incumbent financial institutions have moved
Increasingly away from a traditional, vertically integrated business model and toward
a model that resembles the digital platforms of fintech and big tech providers. Ih
particular, the growth of “banking-as-a-service" (BaaS) entails offering a range of
third-party services to users, thus serving as a matchmaker between clients and
external (often fintech) providers. This can imply new revenues from fees, rather than
net interest income. But it requires strong investments in digital technology to collect
user data and improve offers toward users that are comparable with the
sophisticated, personalised offers of fintech and big tech platforms.

Banks with a platform-based model may thus see a shift in the source of their
revenues and in the required investment in digital technologies. Unfortunately, an
objective classification of banks with a platform model is not available, and research
on this shift in banking business models is scarce. Nonetheless, a simple comparison
of prominent banks that note publicly that they use a platform or BaaS strategy
reveals noticeable differences with international peers. Platform-based banks
(denoted in red in Graph 6, left-hand panel) derived nearly 40% of their revenues
from fees and other non-interest income in 2020, as compared to 33% for peers. They
invested about 50% more than peers on communications, data processing and
technology relative to overall expenditure.

18 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
Revenue mix and IT investment of banks adopting a platform-based model

In per cent of total revenues Graph 7
Income composition Expenditure on technology
40 6.3
38 5.6
36 4.9
34 a  ——a = 42
! | ! | | J ! 1 32 ! ! | | ! | | 135
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Non-interest income:' == Bank with platform business model? Telecomm's, data processing and technology expense:*
— Others? = Banks with a platform business model
=— Others”

1 Defined as total revenue minus net interest income. ? Basedona sample including BBVA, Capital One, Citibank, Deutsche Bank, HSBC,
Kasikornbank, Santander, Standard Chartered and Wells Fargo. 3 Based on a sample of 258 banks with total assets above 50 USD
bn. ? Expenses paid for communications, data processing and technology such as computers, software, information systems and
telecommunications, as a proportion of overall expenditure. *? Based on a sample including BBVA, Capital One, Citibank, Deutsche Bank and
Wells Fargo. É Based on a sample of 99 banks with total assets above 50 USD bn.

Sources: S&P Market Intelligence; authors' calculations.

4. Policy issues and options to reap benefits to inclusion
while mitigating risks

For public policymakers around the world, financial inclusion is a key policy goal —
alongside mandates for financial stability, safety and soundness and consumer
protection. Digital innovation has the potential to support inclusion, in particular
access to safe transaction accounts that can serve as the basis for other financial
services (CPMI and World Bank Group, 2020). As platform-based business models
become increasingly widespread in finance, there is the potential for fintech firms, big
tech firms and incumbent financial institutions to harness platforms to bring new and
underserved groups into the financial system, and for com peting providers to provide
cheaper and more tailored services. In some cases, digital technologies can play a
powerful role in reducing costs and broadening access. Ih other cases, the causes of
a lack of access are institutional, not technological; for instance, existing laws and
regulation may not provide the private sector with the correct incentives to Innovate
and include underserved groups. Where platforms are able to establish and entrench
a dominant position, they may extract rents and fail to provide low-cost services for
underserved groups.

A key insight from both the theoretical and empirical literature is that platforms
may lower costs for the providers, but may not effectively enhance financial inclusion
on their own accord. Private platform operators pursue profit maximisation, subject
to the constraints posed by regulation. To achieve tangible benefits for access to

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion 19
financial services, a “bush” from policy may be necessary. Measures to encourage
interoperability, and complementary measures around supporting infrastructure and
supporting consumer engagement and decision making, are crucial. Meanwhile, to
prevent platforms from achieving a dominant market position or abusing sensitive
user data, financial regulators may need to revisit existing rules and coordinate with
other public sector authorities, notably competition and data protection authorities.

In what follows, we discuss three types of approaches that policymakers may
take. A first is to allow for private sector innovation — perhaps with “soft” guidance
from authorities that innovation should aim to reach underserved groups in society —
and simply to apply existing financial regulations, and antitrust and privacy rules This
may be insufficient given the range of new issues that platforms raise. À second
approach is to update existing regulatory frameworks in these areas to address the
specific risks presented by digital platforms and to more proactively drive financial
inclusion. There are challenges in this area, as business models are changing quickly
lh some cases and regulation seeks to be as future-proof and “technologically neutral”
as possible. Yet ex ante competition rules and requirements for data portability may
be particularly effective. A third approachis to build public infrastructures that private
Innovation can build on top of. This can include digital ID, retail fast payment systems
and other reforms. Each are discussed in turn. Of course, especially the third approach
can complement either of the first two.

Apply existing financial regulation, competition and data privacy rules

A first approach is to simply apply existing financial regulation, competition and data
privacy rules to platforms (fintech, big tech and incumbents). Indeed, many
authorities explicitly adopt a “same business, same risks, same rules” approach, and
make clear to new entrants, or to incumbents responding to new entrants, that
financial activities are subject to the same rule regardless of which institution is
behind them. Ih particular, frameworks for licensing, regulatory reporting, deposit
Insurance, capital and liquidity requirements, etc continue to apply as much to a
fintech or big tech platform as to a traditional bank (see eg Crisanto et al, 2021a;b).
Meanwhile, a bank offering third-party services to lts own clients maintains its
responsibility for com plying with all relevant requirements.

Yet this approach may not always be sufficient to ensure the public interest. Ih
particular, financial regulation and competition law may not always be fast or agile
enough to prevent concentration in fast-moving platform markets.ºº Moreover,
problems could result if some activities do not fit neatly into existing frameworks and
Ih those cases in which platforms do not provide services directly, or leverage their
market dominance in adjacent markets. A silo mentality among some regulators may
allow for some activitles — and risks — to fall into the cracks of existing regulation and
supervision.

Ih particular, there are questions as to how to harness the power and incentives
of platform models while addressing other public policy goals like fair competition
and privacy / data protection. The entry of platforms could enhance competition in

?* —Inthe UK, for example, the Digital Markets Taskforce has suggested that an ex ante regime is needed
to prevent powerful digital firms from exploiting their positions as well as to drive vibrant competition
and innovation. See UK CMA (2020a; b). Penrose (2021) has argued that competition policy decisions
need to be faster and more predictable in the digital era. The EC Google Shopping case took seven
years to come to a decision (now under appeal), and the resulting remedies have not yet been
formally accepted.

20 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
the short run, but if not correctly managed, then competition could be lower in the
longer run as big tech firms grow and become systemically important (FSB, 2019).
Existing approaches to measure market dominance, based for instance on excessive
pricing or measures of market share, may not always capture modern forms of market
dominance — which may include anticompetitive practices to build market share, or
serving as a vendor and competitor to the same firm (Khan, 2017). Where platforms
engage in price discrimination, this may not be measurable to the regulator, and it
may not be clear which market to use to measure market shares.

Moreover, there may be trade-offs between some policy goals (Carriêre-Swallow
and Haksar, 2019; Feyen et al, 2021). For instance, allowing for greater user of
personal data may benefit efficiency, but could be detrimental to privacy. As an
example of the potential trade-off, platforms providing access to previously
underserved consumers (eg consumers with “thin files” in a credit scoring context)
may depend on more personal data or a wider variety of data from individuals in
order to provide a service viably (eg to price credit risk accurately. However,
inadequate coordination between existing regulatory frameworks in many
Jurisdictions — particularly data protection and financial regulation — means that there
are unsatisfactory mechanisms in place for navigating these normative trade-offs
(Agganval, 2021).

Finally, there is a general issue of level playing field between traditional banking
Institutions and platform-based firms given the possible information advantages of
the latter (Padilla and de la Mano, 2018; Stulz, 2019). An activity-based regulatory
approach can ensure that the same activities are subject to the same rules, regardless
of provider. Yet there may be the need to complement this with an entity-based
approach, particularly when platforms become very large or systemically im portant
(Restoy, 2021; Carstens et al, 2021). This brings us to the next potential set of policy
options.

Update existing rules

A second approach is to adapt old and adopt new financial, antitrust and privacy
regulation. Some jurisdictions have already moved to update regulations to adapt to
fintech and big tech entry.º This has included defining new types of licenses (eg for
virtual banks), enhancing competition through application programming interfaces
(APIs) and other tools to enhance data portability, and developing new ex ante
regimes and data protection frameworks — which often extend beyond financial
services. This section gives a brief overview. As discussed in section 2, a particularly
promising approach is to enforce interoperability. The box gives inspiration from the
European Union, where rules had to be adapted due to the emergence of new
technological platforms in other sectors such as telecommunications.

Ih financial regulation, a number of authorities have adapted rules to stipulate
how digital platforms can enter banking and other financial services. In South Korea,
China, Hong Kong and Chinese Taipei, authorities have introduced virtual banking
licenses that allow for digital-only banks with targeted regulatory requirements; in
Many cases, reaching underserved population segments is an explicit policy goal of
such initlatives. In Kenya and many African economies, authorities have tailored
regulatory frameworks to account for mobile money, thus bringing the financial
activities of telecoms platforms into existing frameworks of financial regulation. Ih

*? —Foranoverview of approaches by banking regulators, see BCBS (2018).

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion 21
Mexico, authorities passed a dedicated fintech law that includes financial inclusion as
an explicit policy goal. In some cases, these frameworks have been adapted over time
(Bourreau and Valletti, 2015). In late 2020, in response to the growth of an “originate-
to-distribute" model by big tech platforms, the China Banking and Insurance
Regulatory Commission (CBIRC) adapted rules on online lending and introduced a
30% retention requirement on new loans.

Notably, many regulatory initiatives relating to platforms in finance explicitly
require data portability. As discussed in section 2, data portability can be particularly
promising as it can promote interoperability and allow users to “multi-home” on
different platforms. Open banking requirements in e.g. the EU, UK, India and South
Africa allow users to port their financial data between banks and non-bank (platform)
providers (BCBS, 2019). These initiatives can allow for greater user control over
personal data, and for greater competition between providers. With the ability to
initiate payments from non-bank providers, or to use bank transaction data to access
credit, portability fram eworks can enhance access to payment and credit services, the
number of available providers and the cost of services. We stress, however, that data
portability must be carefully assessed against the risks to users' privacy; else there is
considerable risk of a "race to the bottom” with lack of privacy and an explosion of
negative (data) externalities for consumers.

Ih competition policy, meanwhile, some jurisdictions have recently implemented
broader measures — beyond financial services — aimed to regulate platforms ex ante
ih the digital era. In the UK, the Digital Markets Taskforce has recommended the
creation of a Digital Markets Unit (now established in shadow form) with new powers
to support greater competition in digital markets. The Taskforce has proposed that
there should be an ex ante code of conduct for the most powerful of digital firms. Ih
the EU, the proposed Digital Markets Act and Digital Services Act, proposed in
December 2020, would define new categories of “very large online platforms" and
"gatekeepers” and subject these to specific ex ante requirements against self-
preferencing and other anticompetitive behaviours. Ih the United States, the House
of Representatives' Subcom mittee on Anti-trust, Commercial, and Administrative Law
released a list of recommendations to regulate big tech platforms so as to reduce
anti-competitive behaviour. In China, the State Administration for Market Regulation
Ih November 2020 published draft guidelines to prevent monopolistic behaviour by
internet platforms, promote fair market competition and safeguard the interest of
consumers. Together, these measures show that a more proactive, entity-based
approach to antitrust policy for platforms is being adopted globally, in many cases
defining new frameworks and institutions to keep markets competitive.

Existing and planned European interoperability policies

The EU has a long history of using interoperability as a policy tool to overcome network effects and high switching
costs in concentrated markets such as telecom munications, and foresees its use in a wide range of future digital

services:

* — The Access Directive (2002/19/EC) aims to “establish a regulatory framework... for the relationships between
suppliers of networks and services that will result in sustainable competition, interoperability of electronic

communications services and consumer benefits”. (81)

22 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
* The Framework Directive (2002/21/EC) requires Member States to encourage the use of communications
standards where required “to ensure interoperability of services and to improve freedom of choice for users”.
(817)

* — The European Electronic Communications Code (EECC, 2018/1972) aims to “implement an internal market in
electronic communications networks and services that results in the deployment and take-up of very high
capacity networks, sustainable competition, interoperability of electronic communications services, accessibility,
security of networks and services and end-user benefits” (81(2)(a)). It includes provisions on instant messaging
(*number-independent interpersonal communications service”) (861), which are yet to be used by the competent
national authorities. In particular, authorities may impose, “in justified cases, where end-to-end connectivity
between end-users is endangered due to a lack of interoperability between interpersonal communications
services, and to the extent necessary to ensure end-to-end connectivity between end-users, obligations on
relevant providers of num ber-independent interpersonal communications services which reach a significant level
of coverage and user uptake, to make their services interoperable”.

* — Competition lav enforcement by the European Commission required Microsoft to provide a choice of web
browsers in its Windows operating system, and to allow workgroup software to network Windows PCs; and
Google to provide a choice of default search engine in its Android browser, and to allow alternate specialised
search engines to bid for inclusion in its main results page.

* — TheDigital Future Communication explicitly mentions interoperability as part of the policies on 5G and 6G; digital
health; elD; supercomputing; quantum technologies; blockchain; secure, pan-European cloud capacities; and
exchange of electronic health records.

* — The Communication on A European Strategy for Data states that data interoperability is key for the exploitation
of data value, as well as a tool for increased competition by making it easier to switch between cloud providers.

* — The European Commission is supporting the Member States to ensure their coronavirus contact tracing apps are
interoperable, enabling travellers to be notified following a foreign trip if they were significantly exposed to
someone who later tested positive.

* The commonliy-called Platform to Business Regulation (2019/1150) also provides important underpinnings,
relating to transparency and fairness of all “Intermediation services" and search engines linking businesses and
corporate websites with consumers, including on access to data.

Some types of interoperability have been imposed ex post, eg following investigation by the European
Commission. Yet many competition economists judge these detailed and highly fact-specific cases too slow (seven
years, in some cases), unpredictable, and narrow to provide the broader rules needed for effective digital competition
(Furman et al, p.55).

The recent major reviews of platform com petition for the UK government, DG Competition and US Stigler Center
have all found the use of investigations followed by ex post remedies too slow to cope with these fast-moving
technologies and markets. The UK Furman review concluded: “The key limitation of using market investigations as the
legal basis for a pro-competition approachis that its remedies are largely static. Binding orders cannot be revised and
updated as the nature of solutions needed changes... Relying on this model alone, under the powers currently
available, is not sufficient in digital markets when technologies change but market power is durable. Specific rules
imposed as a remedy following a market investigation may quickly go out of date. What is instead needed is an
ongoing, dynamic counterparty to market participants, adjusting solutions in response to innovations and market
dynamics" (Furman et al, p. 79). Regulations can set ex ante rules, while still leaving open the option for later
enforcement of standard competition law.

Finally, in data protection, a policy area that extends well beyond financial
services, several jurisdictions are actively redefining rules in light of the growing use
of personal data by platforms. Along with health data, financial data are often
explicitly singled out as a sensitive area where special attention is warranted. The
European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), California Consumer

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion 23
Protection Act (CCPA) and the proposed Personal Data Protection law in India are just
a few examples of frameworks that give users data protection rights and impose
obligations on providers to limit the (mis)use of personal data, including punitive
sanctions for infringement. Data protection regulation frameworks are important for
safeguarding consumer privacy and thereby preserving user trust; indeed, empirical
evidence shows that even the poorest users in developing countries value their
privacy and are willing to pay to preserve it (Fernandez Vidal and Medine, 2019).
Again, data portability is often a key element of these regulatory frameworks, with
the aim of enabling users to port their data between different providers — thus reaping
the benefits for (financial) inclusion while mitigating anti-competitive effects due to
data hoarding by platform providers, and more fundamentally, respecting their
fundamental right to privacy and data protection by allowing users to better control
how their data are used.

Provide public Infrastructures

Very often, private sector platform services are built on top of a public sector
Infrastructure, such as government digital identity (ID) initiatives, enhancements to
real-time gross settlement systems (RTGS) and retail fast payment systems (FPS). Such
infrastructures can help to facilitate entry and ensure greater competition between
platform providers.

As one particularly salient example, authorities in India have worked in the past
years to build several key public infrastructures that have achieved impressive results
Ih inclusion. The Aadhaar digital ID infrastructure, the UPI for payments and the
further architectures for data sharing and consent are collectively referred to as the
“India Stack" (D'Silva et al, 2019). Notably, the India Stack has been particularly helpful
ih allowing large digital platform providers to compete on an equal footing with
banks and other non-bank payment services providers — harnessing the low costs and
network effects of their platforms while preventing concentration of data and market
power. One estimate is that the cost of opening a new account has fallen from USD
15 to 7 cents, allowing much wider and more efficient onboarding (Ibid). To promote
competition, the National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), which operates UPI,
recently moved to cap the market share of any third-party application provider to
30% of the overall volume of transactions in any three-month period (NPCI, 2021).

A number of further jurisdictions have designed RTGS systems to allow access by
non-banks, including large platform providers. Examples include China, Hong Kong
and Mexico. By allowing non-banks to access such core systems, central banks can
promote greater competition and retail services built on settlement in central bank
money.

Central banks are also playing an active role in the operation and oversight of
retail FPS. In Mexico, for instance, the central bank has launched the new Cobro Digital
(CoDi) system. In Brazil, the central bank has launched the so-called PIX system
(Alfonso et al, 2020). These retail fast payment systems have allowed for a dramatic
Increase in the speed of domestic payments, and a substantial reduction in costs.
Moreover, by bringing together bank and non-bank payment service providers on
one platform with common standard, they too are promoting a competitive level
playing field and countering the risk of “closed-loop” systems. Evidence suggests that
this has been a powerful force for financial inclusion; for instance, in a sample of 28
countries around the world, the only two countries in which women were at least as

24 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
likely to use fintech services as men — India and Peru — both featured public payment
infrastructures including a retail FPS (Chen et al, 2021).

Finally, retail central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) can be seen as public
infrastructures on a continuum with retail FPS.ºº CBDC projects like the Sand Dollar in
the Bahamas aim explicitly at enhancing financial inclusion, and authorities in the
United States have noted the potential of the digital dollar proposal to benefit
financial inclusion.** A key difference between CBDCs and retail FPS is that CBDCs are
a liability of the central bank, rather than a liability of a bank or payment service
provider. Yet CBDCs, too, can be designed in such a way that private payment service
providers, including big tech and fintech firms, offer retail services to the public.
Indeed, in China, platform providers such as Ant Group, Tencent, Pinduoduo and
others are offering payment services as part of the CBDC pilot of the People's Bank
of China, and most of the advanced CBDC research and development projects around
the world involve private sector parties for retail-facing services (see Auer et al,
2020b).

Domestic and international policy coordination

Each jurisdiction will seek to tailor approaches based on their policy preferences,
Institutional framework and capacity. Nonetheless, since the technologies behind
platforms, and many platforms themselves, are global, there may be commonalities
across countries and the potential for peer learning. International cooperation can
support this process of learning from other authorities.

At both the domestic and international level, it will be particularly crucial for
central banks and financial regulators to work with competition and data protection
authorities. Because central bank policies may impact on competition and data
privacy, and because actions 1h these areas may im pact on core mandates of financial
authorities (including mandates for financial inclusion in many jurisdictions), early
dialogue is important to ensure consistency and coherence of policy approaches.
Given the role of big tech platforms in particular in other sectors, and their
Mmacroeconomic relevance, coordination with policy areas like telecommunications
and tax policy will also be important.

5. Conclusion

Platform -based business models are changing market structure in financial services.
Fintech and big tech entrants have already made substantial inroads in some market
segments, and incumbent financial institutions are responding by increasingly
moving closer to a platform model, themselves. By their very nature, platforms are
highly scalable, making use of network effects and economies of scale and scope in
multi-sided markets. In some cases, this has allowed them to lower costs and achieve
impressive gains in financial inclusion. In other cases, lt has allowed them to serve
3º — CBDCscan be defined as a digital payment instrument, denominated in the national unit of account,
thatis a direct liability of the central bank. See Group of central banks (2020).

3? In February 2021, for instance, Treasury Secretariat Janet Yellen noted: “We do have a problem with
financial inclusion. Too many Americans really don't have access to easy payment systems and bank

accounts. This is something that a digital dollar, a central bank digital currency, coutd help with." See
Condon (20271).

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion 25
existing customers with new, more personalised offers. Yet often, these gains have
been accompanied by pressing risks, particularly from market dominance, data
privacy and financial stability given the potential for systemic importance of platform
providers.

A key insight from the experience to date is that platforms may not enhance
financial inclusion of their own accord. Simply allowing entry by digitally savvy
providers with low costs does not mean that they will necessarily serve the unbanked,
uninsured and those without access to credit or savings products. Even when they do,
they may not deliver the lowest cost service or beneficial outcomes for consumers.
Indeed, a “push” from policy may be needed to ensure that innovation actually
benefits financial inclusion and to protect a competitive environment that protects
consumers, and does not necessarily clash with financial stability, price stability, or
financial integrity. This may need to be accompanied by policies to improve access to
digital infrastructure and to support consumer engagement and decision making.

Going fonward, it is important to carefully assess the dual risks of market
concentration and abuse of (personal) data by digital platforms. Regardless of the
approach, it will be necessary for central banks and regulators, within their legal
mandate, to work closely with competition and data protection authorities, and likely
other public sector bodies, building on existing coordination and information-sharing
mechanisms. There is also great value in peer learning across borders. While
mandates and market developments differ, authorities can learn much from those
who share their path.

26 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
References

Agganwval, N (2021). "The norms of algorithmic credit scoring,” The Cambridge Law
Journal vol 80, no 1, pp 42-73.

Alfonso, V, C Boar, J Frost, L Gambacorta and J Liu (2021), “E-commerce in the
pandemic and beyond”, BIS Bulletin no 36, January.

Alfonso, V, A Tombini and F Zampolli (2020), “Retail payments in Latin America and
the Caribbean: present and future”, BIS Quarterly Review, December.

Amazon (2018), “Small Business Impact Report”, 3 May.

Arner, D, R Buckley, D Zetzsche and R Veidt (2020), “Sustainability, fintech and
financial inclusion”, European Business and Organization Law Review.

Arthur, W (1989), “Competing Technologies, Increasing Returns, and Lock-lh by
Historical Events”, The Economic Journal, vol 99, no 394, pp 11631.

Auer, R, G Cornelli and J Frost (2020a), “Covid-19, cash and the future of payments”,
BIS Bulletin 3, March.

--- (2020b), "Rise of the central bank digital currencies: drivers, approaches and
technologies”, BIS Working Paper no 880, August.

Banchongduang, S (2016), “Banking app to aid the visually impaired”, The Bangkok
Post, 23 November.

Bank for International Settlements (BIS) (2019), “Big tech in finance: opportunities and
risks", BIS Annual Economic Report, Ch. Ill, 23 June.

--- (2020), "Central banks and payments in the digital era”, BIS Annual Economic
Report, Ch. Ill, 22 June.

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2018), “Sound Practices: implications of
fintech developments for banks and bank supervisors”, February.

--- (2019), “Report on open banking and application programming interfaces”,
November.

Beck, T (2020), “Fintech and Financial Inclusion: Opportunities and Pitfalls”, ADBI
Working Paper, no 1165, Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute, July.

Belleflamme, P and M Peitz (2021), The Economics of Platforms, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Boissay, F, T Ehlers, L Gambacorta and HS Shin (2021), “Big techs in Finance: on the
new nexus between data privacy and competition" in R Rau, R Wardrop and L Zingales
(eds), The Handbook of Technological Finance, London: Palgrave Macmillan.

Bourreau, M and T Valletti, “Competition and Interoperability in Mobile Money
Platform Markets: What Works and What Doesn't?”, Communications & Strategies, n.
99, 11-32, 2015.

Caffarra, C, G Crawford and T Valletti (2020), “How tech rolls": Potential com petition
and 'reverse' killer acquisitions”, voxEU, May.

Cantú, C, G Cheng, S Doerr, J Frost and L Gambacorta (2020), “On health and privacy:
technology to combat the pandemic”, BIS Bulletin no 17, May.

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion 27
Carlin, B, A Olafsson and M Pagel (2019), "Generational differences in managing
personal finances”, AEA Papers and Proceedings vol 109, pp 54-59.

Carriêre-Swallow, Y, and V Haksar (2019), “The Economics and Implications of Data:
An Integrated Perspective”, IMF Departmental Paper no 19/16, September.

Carriêre-Swallow, Y, V Haksar, and M Patham (2021), “Indias Approach to Open
Banking: Some Implications for Financial Inclusion”, IMF Working Paper no 21/52,
February.

Carstens, A, S Claessens, F Restoy and HS Shin (2021), “Regulating big techs in
finance”, BIS Bulletin no 45, August.

Chen, S, S Doerr, J Frost, L Gambacorta and HS Shin (2021), “The fintech gender gap”,
BIS Working Paper no 931, March.

Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) and World Bank Group
(2020), “Payment aspects of financial inclusion in the fintech era”, April.

Condon, € (2021), “Yellen Signals Interest in Backing Digital-Dollar Research”,
Bloomberg, February.

Cornelli, G, J Frost, L Gambacorta, R Rau, R Wardrop and T Ziegler (2020), “Fintech
and big tech credit: a new database”, BIS working paper, No 887.

Cornelli, G, S Doerr, L Franco and J Frost (2021), “Funding for fintechs: patterns and
drivers”, BIS Quarterly Review, September.

Crisanto, J, J Ehrentraud and M Fabian (2021a), “Big techs in finance: regulatory
approaches and policy options”, FSI Brief no 12, March.

Crisanto, J, J Ehrentraud, A Lawson and F Restoy (2021b), “Big tech regulation: what
is going on?”, FSI Insights no 36, September.

D'Silva, D, Z Filkova, F Packer and S Tiwari (2019), “The design of digital financial
Infrastructure: lessons from India”, BIS Paper no 106.

De Vera-Yap, C, R Barbosa-Salva, G Cainglet, L Cerrero, S Padilla, E Suficiencia, R
Tomas and V Valero (2020), "Financial Digital Rails and Financial Inclusion”, in Bangko
Sentral ng Pilipinas, BSP Unbound: Central Banking and the COVID-19 Pandemic in
the Philippines.

Del Carpio Ponce, P (2018), “Modelo Peru: A Mobile Money Platform Offering
Interoperability towards Financial Inclusion”, International Finance Corporation (IFO)
EMCompass, no 54.

Digital Competition Expert Panel (2019), “Unlocking Digital Competition”, March.

Ehrentraud, J, D García Ocampo, L Garzoni and M Piccolo (2020), “Policy responses to
fintech: A cross-country overview”, FSI Insights, January.

Eisenmann, T, G Parker and M van Alstyne (2011), “Platform Envelopment”, Strategic
Management Journal, 32: 127085.

Evans, D and R Schmalensee (2014), “The Antitrust Analysis of Multi-Sided Platform
Businesses”, in R Blair and D Sokol (eds), The Oxford Handbook of International
Antitrust Economics, vol 1, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

EY (2019), “Global FinTech Adoption Index 2019”, September.

--- (2020), “A vision for platform-based banking”, February.

28 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
Fernandez Vidal, M and D Medine (2019), “Is Data Privacy Good for Business?”, CGAP
Focus Note, Consultative Group to Assist the Poor, Washington, DC, December.

Feyen, E, J Frost, L Gambacorta, H Natarajan and M Saal (2021), “Fintech and the
Digital Transformation of Financial Services: Implications for Market Structure and
Public Policy", BIS Paper no 117.

Financial Stability Board (2017), “Financial stability implications from fintech:
regulatory and supervisory issues that merit authorities' attention”, June.

--- (2019), “FinTech and market structure in financial services: Market developments
and potential financial stability implications”, February.

Frost, J (2020), "The economic forces driving fintech adoption across countries”, BIS
Working Paper no 838, February.

Frost, J, L Gambacorta, Y Huang, HS Shin, and P Zbinden (2019), “BigTech and the
changing structure of financial intermediation”, Economic Policy, vol 34, no 100, pp
761-99.

Frost, J, L Gambacorta and HS Shin (2021), “From financial innovation to inclusion”,
Finance & Development, March.

Gambacorta, Y Huang, Z Li, H Qiu and S Chen (2020), “Data vs collateral”, BIS Working
Paper 881, September.

Goldfarb, A and C Tucker (2019), “Digital Economics”, Journal of Economic Literature,
vol 57, no 1, pp 343.

Group of central banks (2020), "Central bank digital currencies: foundational
principles and core features”, Joint Report, no 1, October.

Hau, H, Y Huang, H Shan and Z Sheng (2020), “FinTech Credit and Entrepreneurial
Growth", Working Paper.

Hua, XP and YP Huang (2020), “Understanding China's fintech sector: development,
impacts and risks”, The European Journal of Finance.

Jagtiani, J and C Lemieux (2018), “Do fintech lenders penetrate areas that are
underserved by traditional banks?”, Journal of Economics and Business, vol 100, pp
43-54.

Jenik, |, T Lyman and A Nava (2017), "Crowdfunding and Financial Inclusion”,
Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP) Working Paper.

Jullien, B and W Sand-Zantman (2020), “The Economics of Platforms: A Theory Guide
for Competition Policy”, Toulouse School of Economics Digital Center Policy Paper.

Kamepalli, S K, R Rajan and L Zingales (2020): "Kill zone", NBER Working Paper, no
27146.

Khan, L (2017), "“Amazon's Antitrust Paradox”, Yale Law Journal, vol 126.

Lamoreaux, N (2020), “The Problem of Bigness: From Standard Oil to Google”, Journal
of Economic Perspectives, vol 33, no 3, pp 94-117.

Luohan Academy (2019), “Digital Technology and Inclusive Growth", Annual Report,
January.

Moeser, M (2020), "Google Pay overhaul adds in-app banking with Citi, Stanford FCU
and others”, PaymentsSource, November.

Platform-based business models and financial inclusion 29
National Payment Corporation of India (NPCI) (2021), “Standard Operating Procedure
(SOP) — Market Share Cap for Third Party Application Providers (TPAP)”, Circular,
March.

Padilla, J and M de la Mano (2018), “Big Tech Banking", Journal of Competition Law &
Economics, vol 14, no 4, pp 494-526.

Penrose, J (2021), “Power to the people: independent report on competition policy”,
February.

Philippon, T (2020), “On fintech and financial inclusion”, BIS Working Paper no 841,
February.

Restoy, F (2021), “Fintech regulation: how to achieve a level playing field”, FSI
Occasional Paper no 17, February.

Rochet, JC and J Tirole (2008), “Tying in two-sided markets and the honor all cards
rule", International Journal of Industrial Organization, vol 26, no 6, pp 133347.

Sahay, R, M Cihák, P N'Diaye, A Barajas, S Mitra, A Kyobe, Y Mooi and S Yousefi (2015),
“Financial inclusion: can it meet multiple macroeconomic goals?”, IMF Staff Discussion
Note no 15/17.

Singh, M (2020), “Walmart's PhonePe zips past Google Pay in India as UPI tops 2B
monthly transactions”, TechCrunch, November.

Sotom ayor, N, J Talledo and S Wong (2018), “Determinants of financial inclusion in
Peru: Recent Evidence from the Demand Side”, SBS Working Paper, DT/06/2018.

Stulz, R (2019), “FinTech, BigTech, and the Future of Banks”, Fisher College of Business
Working Paper no. 2019-03-020,

UK Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) (2020a), "Online platforms and digital
advertising: Market study final report”, 1 July.

--- (2020b), “Advice of the Digital Markets Taskforce: A New Pro-Com petition Regime
for Digital Markets", December 8 2020.

United Nations Secretary-General's Special Advocate for Inclusive Finance for
Development (UNSGSA) FinTech Working Group and Cambridge Centre for
Alternative Finance (CCAF) (2019), “Early Lessons on Regulatory Innovations to Enable
Inclusive Fintech: Innovation Offices, Regulatory Sandboxes, and Regtech”, February,

World Bank (2018), “The Global Findex Database: Measuring Financial Inclusion and
the Fintech Revolution”, April.

Zetzsche, D, W Birdthistle, D Arner and R Buckley (2020), “Digital Finance Platforms:
Toward a New Regulatory Paradigm”, University of Pennsylvania Journal of Business
Law, vol 23, no 1.

30 Platform-based business models and financial inclusion
